
	Cramfs - cram a filesystem onto a small ROM

cramfs is designed to be simple and small, and to compress things well. 

It uses the zlib routines to compress a file one page at a time, and
allows random page access.  The meta-data is not compressed, but is
expressed in a very terse representation to make it use much less
diskspace than traditional filesystems. 

You can't write to a cramfs filesystem (making it compressible and
compact also makes it _very_ hard to update on-the-fly), so you have to
create the disk image with the "mkcramfs" utility.


Usage Notes
-----------

File sizes are limited to less than 16MB.

Maximum filesystem size is a little over 256MB.  (The last file on the
filesystem is allowed to extend past 256MB.)

Only the low 8 bits of gid are stored.  The current version of
mkcramfs simply truncates to 8 bits, which is a potential security
issue.

Hard links are supported, but hard linked files
will still have a link count of 1 in the cramfs image.

Cramfs directories have no `.' or `..' entries.  Directories (like
every other file on cramfs) always have a link count of 1.  (There's
no need to use -noleaf in `find', btw.)

No timestamps are stored in a cramfs, so these default to the epoch
(1970 GMT).  Recently-accessed files may have updated timestamps, but
the update lasts only as long as the inode is cached in memory, after
which the timestamp reverts to 1970, i.e. moves backwards in time.

This version of mkcramfs implements block pointer extensions that allows
for uncompressed blocks and random block placementt. Currently this is
used to avoid compressing small files that end up taking more space once
"compressed" (enabled with mkcramfs -x). A kernel with the appropriate
support is required (from Linux v4.15).

It is possible to have some files, or portions of some files, kept
uncompressed and properly aligned to allow direct mapping into user
space for eXecute-In-Place (XIP) of program files. This requires that
the cramfs image be stored in ROM or Flash and accessible via the memory
bus. This is currently performed on the read-only segments of ELF files
with mkcramfs -X (or -X twice for target systems with a MMU for which a
greater alignment is necessary). This implies -x as described above.

Currently, cramfs must be written and read with architectures of the
same endianness, and can be read only by kernels with PAGE_SIZE
== 4096.  At least the latter of these is a bug, but it hasn't been
decided what the best fix is.  For the moment if you have larger pages
you can just change the #define in mkcramfs.c, so long as you don't
mind the filesystem becoming unreadable to future kernels.


Hacker Notes
------------

See fs/cramfs/README for filesystem layout and implementation notes.

Altered cramfs inode representations exist in the field, presumably as an
attempt by some vendor at obfuscating their firmware images. Please see
https://github.com/npitre/cramfs-tools/issues/10 for details.
